The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twenty-Three Stories by Twenty and Three
Authors, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Twenty-Three Stories by Twenty and Three Authors

Author: Various

Editor: Ernest Rhys
        Catherine Amy Dawson-Scott

Release Date: June 8, 2020 [EBook #62347]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWENTY-THREE STORIES, TWENTY-THREE AUTHORS ***



THE RANSOM

By CUTLIFFE HYNE


Methuen wriggled himself into a corner of the hut, rested his shoulders
against the _adobe_ wall, and made himself as comfortable as the
raw-hide thongs with which he was tied up would permit. “Well, Calvert,”
said he, “I hope you quite realise what an extremely ugly hole we’re
in?”

“Garcia will hang the pair of us before sunset,” I replied, “and that’s
a certainty. My only wonder is we haven’t been strung up before this.”

“You think a rope and a tree’s a sure thing, do you? I wish I could
comfort myself with that idea. I wouldn’t mind a simple gentlemanly dose
of hanging. But there are more things in heaven and earth, Calvert——” He
broke off and whistled drearily.

I moistened my dry, cracked lips, and asked him huskily what he meant.

“Torture, old man. That’s what we’re being saved for, I’m very much
afraid. A Peruvian guerilla is never a gentle-minded animal at the best
of times, and Garcia is noted as being the most vindictive brute to be
found between the Andes and the Pacific. Then if you’ll kindly remember
how you and I have harried him, and shot down his men, and cut off his
supplies, and made his life a torment and a thing of tremors for the
last four weeks, you’ll see he had got a big bill against us. If he’d
hated us less, he’d have had us shot at sight when we were caught; as it
is, I’m afraid he felt that a couple of bullets in hot blood wouldn’t
pay off the score.”

“If he thinks the matter over calmly, he’ll not very well avoid seeing
that if he wipes us out there’ll be reprisals to be looked for.”

“And a fat lot,” replied Methuen grimly, “he’ll care for the chance of
those. If we are put out of the way, he knows quite well that there are
no two other men in the Chilian Service who can keep him on the trot as
we have done. No, sir. We can’t scare Garcia with that yarn. You think
that because we’re alive still there’s hope. Well, I’ve sufficient faith
in my theory for this: If anyone offered me a shot through the head now,
I’d accept it, and risk the chance.”

“You take the gloomy view. Now the man’s face is not altogether cruel.
There’s humour in it.”

“Then probably he’ll show his funniness when he takes it out of us,”
Methuen retorted. “Remember that punishment in the ‘Mikado’? That had
‘something humorous’ in it. Boiling oil, if I don’t forget.”

Involuntarily I shuddered, and the raw-hide ropes cut deeper into my
wrists and limbs. I had no great dread of being killed in the ordinary
way, or I should not have entered the Chilian Army in the middle of a
hot war; and I was prepared to risk the ordinary woundings of action in
return for the excitements of the fight. But to be caught, and held a
helpless prisoner, and be deliberately tortured to death by every
cruelty this malignant fiend, Garcia, could devise, was a possibility I
had not counted on before. In fact, as the Peruvians had repeatedly
given out that they would offer no quarter to us English in the Chilian
Service, we had all of us naturally resolved to die fighting rather than
be taken. And, indeed, this desperate feeling paid very well, since on
two separate occasions when Methuen and myself had been cornered with
small bodies of men, and would have surrendered if we could have been
guaranteed our lives, we went at them each time so furiously that on
each occasion we broke through and escaped. But one thinks nothing of
the chances of death and maiming at those times. There is a glow within
one’s ribs which scares away all trace of fear.

“I suppose there’s no chance of rescue?” I said.

“None whatever,” said Methuen, with a little sigh. “Think it over,
Calvert. We start out from the _hacienda_ with an escort of five men,
sing out our adios, and ride away to enjoy a ten days’ leave in the
mountains. The troops are left to recruit; for ten days they can drop us
out of mind. Within twelve hours of our leaving them, Garcia cleverly
ambushes us in a cañon where not three people pass in a year. The poor
beggars who form our escort are all _gastados_.”

“Yes, but are you sure of that?” I interrupted. “I saw them all drop off
their horses when we were fired upon, but that doesn’t prove they were
dead. Some might have been merely wounded, and when the coast cleared,
it is just possible they crawled back to our post with the news. Still,
I own it’s a small chance.”

“And you may divest yourself of even that thin rag of hope. Whilst you
were being slung senseless across a horse, I saw that man without the
ears go round with a _machete_, and—well, when the brute had done, there
was no doubt about the poor fellows being as dead as lumps of mud. Ah,
and talk of the devil——”

The earless man swung into the hut.

“_Buenas_, Señores,” said he mockingly. “You will have the honour now of
being tried, and I’m sure I hope you will be pleased with the result.”

“I suppose we shall find that out later,” said Methuen with a yawn; “but
anyway, I don’t think much of your hospitality. A cup of wine now after
that ugly ride we’ve had to-day would come in very handy, or even a nip
of _aguardiente_ would be better than nothing.”

“I fancy it might be a waste of good liquor,” was the answer; “but you
must ask Garcia. He will see to your needs.”

A guard of twelve ragged fellows, armed with carbine and _machete_, had
followed the earless man into the hut, and two of them, whilst he
talked, had removed the seizings from our knees and ankles. They helped
us to our feet, and we walked with them into the dazzling sunshine
outside.

“I’ll trouble some of you for my hat,” said Methuen, when the glare
first blazed down on him; and then, as no one took any notice of the
request, he lurched against the earless man with a sudden swerve, and
knocked his sombrero on to the brown baked turf. “Well, I’ll have yours,
you flea-ridden _ladron_,” said he; “it’s better than nothing at all.
Pick up the foul thing, and shake it, and put it on my head.”

The guerilla bared his teeth like an animal, and drew a pistol. I
thought he would have shot my comrade out of hand, and by his look I
could see that Methuen expected it. Indeed, he had deliberately invited
the man to that end. But, either because the nearness of Garcia and fear
of his discipline stayed him, or through thought of a finer vengeance
which was to come, the earless man contented himself by dealing a
battery of kicks and oaths, and bidding our guards to ward us more
carefully.

In this way, then, we walked along a path between two fields of vines,
and passed down the straggling street of the village which the guerillas
had occupied, and brought up in a little _plaza_ which faced the
white-walled chapel. In the turret a bell was tolling dolefully with
slow strokes, and as the sound came to me through the heated air, it did
not require much imagination to frame it into an omen. In the centre of
the _plaza_ was a vast magnolia tree, filled with scented wax-like
flowers, and splashed with cones of coral-pink.

We drew up before the _piazza_ of the principal house. Seated under its
shade in a split-cane rocker, Garcia awaited us, a small, meagre, dark
man, with glittering teeth, and fingers lemon-coloured from cigarette
juice.

He stared at us and spat; and the trial, such as it was, began.

I must confess that the proceedings astonished me. Animus there
certainly was; the guerillas as a whole were disposed to give us short
shrift; but their chief insisted on at least some parade of justice. The
indictment was set forward against us: We had shot, hanged, and harried,
and in fact used all the harshness of war. Had we been Chilians in the
Chilian Service, this might have been pardonable; but we were aliens
from across the sea; mere freebooters, fighting, not for a country, but
each for his own hand; and as such we were beyond the pale of military
courtesy. We had earned a punishment. Had we any word to speak why this
should not be given?

Garcia looked towards us expectantly, and then set himself to roll a
fresh cigarette.

I shrugged my shoulders. It seemed useless to say anything.

Methuen said: “Look here, sir! You’ve got us, there is no mistake about
that. It seems to me you’ve two courses before you, and they are these:
Either, you can kill us, more or less barbarously, in which case you
will raise a most pestilential hunt at your heels; or, you can put us up
to ransom. Now neither Calvert here, nor myself, are rich men; but if
you choose to let us go with sound skins, we’re prepared to pay ten
thousand Chilian dollars apiece for our passports. Now, does that strike
you?”

Garcia finished rolling his cigarette, and lit it with care. He inhaled
a deep breath of smoke.

“Señor,” he said (the words coming out from between his white teeth with
little puffs of vapour), “you do not appear to understand. You fight as
a soldier of fortune, and I am merely in arms as a patriot. I am no
huckster to traffic men’s lives for money, nor am I a timorous fool to
be scared into robbing a culprit of his just dues.”

“Very well, then,” said Methuen, “murder the pair of us.”

Garcia smiled unpleasantly. “You may be a very brave man,” said he, “but
you are not a judicious one. To a judge less just than myself this
insolence might have added something to your punishment; but as it is I
shall overlook what you have said, and only impose the penalty I had
determined upon before you spoke.”

He lifted his thin yellow fingers, and drew a fresh breath of smoke.
Then he waved the cigarette towards the magnolia tree in the centre of
the _plaza_. “You see that bough which juts out towards the chapel?”

“It’s made for a gallows,” said Methuen.

“Precisely,” said the guerilla, “and it will be used as one inside ten
minutes. I shall string one of you up by the neck, to dangle there
between heaven and earth. The other man shall have a rifle and
cartridges, and if, standing where he does now, he can cut with a bullet
the rope with which his friend is hanged, then you shall both go free.”

“I hear you say it,” said Methuen. “In other words you condemn one of us
to be strangled slowly without chance of reprieve. But what guarantee
have we that you will not slit the second man’s throat after you have
had your sport out of him?”

Garcia sprang to his feet with a stamp of passion, and the chair rolled
over backwards. “You foul adventurer!” he cried. “You paid man-killer!”
and then he broke off with a bitter “Pah!” and folded his arms, and for
a minute held silence till he got his tongue in hand again. “Señor,” he
said coldly, “my country’s wrongs may break my heart, but they can never
make me break my word. I may be a hunted guerilla, but I still remain a
gentleman.”

“I beg your pardon,” said Methuen.

“We will now,” continued Garcia icily, “find out which of you two will
play which part. Afterwards I will add another condition which may lend
more skill to what follows. I will not coerce you. Kindly choose between
yourselves which of you will hang and which will shoot.”

My comrade shrugged his shoulders. “I like you, Calvert, old man,” said
he, “but I’m not prepared to dance on nothing for you.”

“It would be simplest to toss for exit,” I said.

“Precisely; but, my dear fellow, I have both hands trussed up, and no
coin.”

“Pray let me assist you,” said Garcia. “Señor Calvert, may I trouble you
for an expression of opinion?”

He leant over the edge of the _piazza_, and span a dollar into the air.
I watched it with a thumping heart, and when for an instant it paused, a
dazzling splash of brightness against the red-tiled roof, I cried:
“Heads!”

The coin fell with a faint thud in the dust a yard from my feet.

“Well?” said Methuen.

“I congratulate you, old fellow. I swing.”

He frowned and made no reply. Garcia’s voice broke the silence.
“_Bueno_, Señor Methuen,” he said. “I advise you to shoot straight, or
you will not get home even now. You remember I said there was still
another condition. Well, here you are: you must cut your friend down
with a bullet before he is quite dead, or I’ll string you up beside
him.”

Methuen let up a short laugh. “Remember what I said about that fellow in
‘the Mikado,’ Calvert? You see where the ‘humour’ comes in? We’ve had
that coin spun for nothing. You and I must change positions.”

“Not at all. I take what I’ve earned.”

“But I say yes. It works this way: I took it that the man who was
hanging stood a delicate chance anyway, and I didn’t feel generous
enough to risk it. But now the Señor here has put in the extra clause,
the situation is changed altogether. You aren’t a brilliant shot, old
man, but you may be able to cut me down with a bullet if you remember
what you’re firing for, and shoot extra straight. But it’s a certain
thing that I couldn’t do it if I blazed away till Doomsday. The utmost I
could manage would be to fluke a pellet into your worthy self. So you
see I must wear the hemp, and you must apply your shoulder to the rifle
butt. Laugh, you fool,” he added in English. “Grin, and say something
funny, or these brutes will think we care for them.”

But I was incapable of further speech. I could have gibed at the
prospect of being hanged myself, but the horror of this other ordeal
turned me sick and dumb. And at what followed I looked on mutely.

There was a well at one side of the plaza, and the earless man went and
robbed the windlass of its rope. With clumsy landsman’s fingers he
formed a noose, took it to the great magnolia tree, and threw the loose
end over the projecting branch. The bell of the little white chapel
opposite went on tolling gravely, and they marched my friend up to his
fate over the sun-baked dust. They passed a thong round his ankles; the
earless man fitted the noose to his throat; a dozen of the guerillas
with shouts and laughter laid hold of the hauling part of the line; and
then a voice from behind fell upon my ear. Garcia was speaking to me.
With a strain I dragged my eyes away from the glare of the _plaza_, and
listened. He was smiling wickedly.

“——, and so your pluck has oozed away?” he was saying, as the cigarette
smoke billowed up from between the white walls of his teeth. “Well, of
course, if you do not care for the game, you can throw up your hand at
once. You’ve only to say the word, and you can be dangling on that bough
there inside a couple of minutes. It’s quite strong enough to carry more
fruit than it will bear just now. But it’s rather hard on your friend
not to try——”

My wits came to me again. “You dolt!” I cried; “how can I shoot with my
arms trussed up like this? If the whole thing is not a mockery, cut me
adrift and give me a rifle.”

He beckoned to one of his men, and the fellow came up and cut off the
lashings from my wrists and elbows; and then, with a sour smile, he
motioned to some of the others, who drew near and held their weapons at
the ready. “I dare wager, Señor Calvert,” he said, “that if you’d me for
a mark you would not score a miss. So I wish to insure that you do not
shoot in this direction.” He raised his voice, and shouted across the
baking sunlight: “Quite ready here, _amigos_. So up with the target.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

Now up to this point I am free to own that since our capture I had cut a
pretty poor figure. I had not whined, but at the same time I had not
seen my way to put on Methuen’s outward show of careless brazen courage.
But when I watched the guerillas tighten on the rope and sway him up
till his stretched-out feet swung a couple of hand-spans above the
ground, then my coolness returned to me, and my nerves set like icicles
in their sockets. He was sixty yards away, and at that distance, the
well-rope dwindled to the bigness of a shoemaker’s thread. Moreover, the
upper two-thirds of it was almost invisible, because it hung before a
background of shadows. But the eighteen inches above my poor friend’s
head stood out clear and distinct against the white walls of the chapel
beyond, and as it swayed to pulsing of the body beneath, it burnt itself
upon my eyesight till all the rest of the world was blotted out in a red
haze. I never knew before how thoroughly a man could concentrate
himself.

They handed me the rifle, loaded and cocked. It was a single-shot
Winchester, and I found out afterwards, though I did not know it then,
that either through fiendish wish to further hamper my aim, or through
pure forgetfulness, they had left the sights cocked up at three hundred
yards. But that did not matter; the elevation was a detail of minor
import; and besides, I was handling the weapon as a game shot fires,
with head up, and eyes glued on the mark, and rifle-barrel following the
eyes by instinct alone. You must remember that I had no stationary mark
to aim at. My poor comrade was writhing and swaying at the end of his
tether, and the well-rope swung hither and thither like some contorted
pendulum.

Once I fired, twice I fired, six times, ten times, and still the rope
remained uncut, and the bullets rattled harmlessly against the white
walls of the chapel beyond. With the eleventh shot came the tinkle of
broken glass, and the bell, after a couple of hurried nervous clangs,
ceased tolling altogether. With the thirteenth shot a shout went up from
the watching crowd. I had stranded the rope, and the body which dangled
beneath the magnolia tree began slowly to gyrate.

Then came a halt in the firing. I handed the Winchester back to the
fellow who was reloading, but somehow or other the exploded cartridge
had jammed in the breach. I danced and raged before him in my passion of
hurry, and the cruel brutes round yelled in ecstasies of merriment. Only
Garcia did not laugh. He re-rolled a fresh cigarette, with his thin
yellow fingers, and leisurely rocked himself in the split-cane chair.
The man could not have been more unmoved if he had been overlooking a
performance of Shakespeare.

At last I tore the Winchester from the hands of the fellow who was
fumbling with it, and clawed at the jammed cartridge myself, breaking my
nails and smearing the breech-lock with blood. If it had been welded
into one solid piece, it could scarcely have been firmer. But the thrill
of the moment gave my hands the strength of pincers. The brass case
moved from side to side; it began to crumple; and I drew it forth and
hurled it from me, a mere ball of shapeless, twisted metal. Then one of
the laughing brutes gave me another cartridge, and once more I
shouldered the loaded weapon.

The mark was easier now. The struggles of my poor friend had almost
ceased, and though the well-rope still swayed, its movements were
comparatively rhythmical, and to be counted upon. I snapped down the
sights, put the butt-plate to my shoulder, and cuddled the stock with my
cheek. Here for the first time was a chance of something steadier than a
snap-shot.

I pressed home the trigger as the well-rope reached one extremity of its
swing. Again a few loose ends sprang from the rope, and again the body
began slowly to gyrate. But was it Methuen I was firing to save, or was
I merely wasting shot to cut down a mass of cold dead clay?

I think that more agony was compressed for me into a few minutes then
than most men meet with in a lifetime. Even the onlooking guerillas were
so stirred that for the first time their gibing ceased, and two of them
of their own accord handed me cartridges. I slipped one home and closed
the breech-lock. The perspiration was running in a stream from my chin.
Again I fired. Again the well-rope was snipped, and I could see the
loosened strands ripple out as a snake unwraps itself from a branch.

One more shot. God in heaven, I missed! Why was I made to be a murderer
like this?

Garcia’s voice came to me coldly. “Your last chance, Señor. I can be
kept waiting here no longer. And I think you are wasting time. Your
friend seems to have quitted us already.”

Another cartridge. I sank to one knee and rested my left elbow on the
other. The plaza was hung in breathless silence. Every eye was strained
to see the outcome of the shot. The men might be inhuman in their
cruelty, but they were human enough in their curiosity.

The body span to one end of its swing: I held my fire. It swung back,
and the rifle muzzle followed. Like some mournful pendulum it passed
through the air, and then a glow of certainty filled me like a drink. I
knew I could not miss that time; and I fired; and the body, in a limp
and shapeless heap, fell to the ground.

With a cry I threw the rifle from me and raced across the sunlit dust.
Not an arm was stretched out to stop me. Only when I had reached my
friend and loosened that horrible ligature from his neck, did I hear
voices clamouring over my fate.

“And now this other Inglese, your excellency,” the earless man said.
“Shall we shoot him from here, or shall we string him up in the other’s
place?”

But the answer was not what the fellow expected. Garcia replied to him
in a shriek of passion. “You foul, slaughtering brute,” he cried,
“another offer like that and I’ll pistol you where you stand. You heard
me pass my word: do you dream that I could break it? They have had their
punishment, and if we see one another again, the meeting will be none of
my looking for. We leave this _puebla_ in five minutes. See to your
duties. Go.”

The words came to me dully through the heated air. I was almost mad with
the thought that my friend was dead, and that the fault was mine,
_mine_, mine alone!

I listened for his breaths; they did not come. I felt for a heart-throb;
there was not so much as a flutter. His neck was seared by a ghastly
ring. His face was livid. And yet I would not admit even then that he
was dead. With a cry I seized his arms, and moved them first above his
head till he looked like a man about to dive, and then clapped them
against his sides, repeating this an infinite number of times, praying
that the airs I drew through his lungs might blow against some
smouldering spark of humanity, and kindle it once more into life.

The perspiration rolled from me; my mouth was as a sandpit; the heavy
scent of the magnolia blossoms above sickened me with its strength; the
sight departed from my eyes. I could see nothing beyond a small circle
of the hot dust around, which waved and danced in the sunlight, and the
little green lizards which came and looked at me curiously, and forgot
that I was human.

And then, of a sudden, my comrade gave a sob, and his chest began to
heave of itself without my laborious aid. And after that for a while I
knew very little more. The sun-baked dust danced more wildly in the
sunshine, the lizards changed to darker colours, the light went out, and
when next I came to my senses Methuen was sitting up with one hand
clutching at his throat, looking at me wildly.

“What has happened?” he gasped. “I thought I was dead, and Garcia had
hanged me. Garcia——No one is here. The _puebla_ seems deserted. Calvert,
tell me.”

“They have gone,” I said. “We are alive. We will get away from here as
soon as you can walk.”

He rose to his feet, swaying. “I can walk now. But what about you?”

“I am an old man,” I said, “wearily old. In the last two hours I have
grown a hundred years. But I think I can walk also. Yes, look, I am
strong. Lean on my arm. Do you see that broken window in the chapel?
When I fired through that, the bell stopped tolling.”

“Let us go inside the chapel for a minute before we leave the village,”
said Methuen. “We have had a very narrow escape, old man. I—I—feel
thankful.”

There was a faint smell of incense inside that little white-walled
chapel. The odour of it lingers by me still.



End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Twenty-Three Stories by Twenty and
Three Authors, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWENTY-THREE STORIES, TWENTY-THREE AUTHORS ***

***** This file should be named 62347-0.txt or 62347-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/2/3/4/62347/

Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
