The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Works of Edgar Allan Poe, Volume 5, by Edgar Allan Poe

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Works of Edgar Allan Poe, Volume 5

Author: Edgar Allan Poe

Release Date: April, 2000  [Etext #2151]
[Most recently updated: December 12, 2020]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WORKS OF EDGAR ALLAN POE, VOL. 5 ***



 A TALE OF JERUSALEM


     Intensos rigidam in frontem ascendere canos
     Passus erat——
                    —Lucan—_De Catone_


    ——a bristly _bore_.
                    _Translation._


      “Let us hurry to the walls,” said Abel-Phittim to Buzi-Ben-Levi and Simeon
      the Pharisee, on the tenth day of the month Thammuz, in the year of the
      world three thousand nine hundred and forty-one—“let us hasten to the
      ramparts adjoining the gate of Benjamin, which is in the city of David,
      and overlooking the camp of the uncircumcised; for it is the last hour of
      the fourth watch, being sunrise; and the idolaters, in fulfilment of the
      promise of Pompey, should be awaiting us with the lambs for the
      sacrifices.”


      Simeon, Abel-Phittim, and Duzi-Ben-Levi were the Gizbarim, or
      sub-collectors of the offering, in the holy city of Jerusalem.

      “Verily,” replied the Pharisee; “let us hasten: for this generosity in the
      heathen is unwonted; and fickle-mindedness has ever been an attribute of
      the worshippers of Baal.”


      “That they are fickle-minded and treacherous is as true as the
      Pentateuch,” said Buzi-Ben-Levi, “but that is only toward the people of
      Adonai. When was it ever known that the Ammonites proved wanting to their
      own interests? Methinks it is no great stretch of generosity to allow us
      lambs for the altar of the Lord, receiving in lieu thereof thirty silver
      shekels per head!”


      “Thou forgettest, however, Ben-Levi,” replied Abel-Phittim, “that the
      Roman Pompey, who is now impiously besieging the city of the Most High,
      has no assurity that we apply not the lambs thus purchased for the altar,
      to the sustenance of the body, rather than of the spirit.”


      “Now, by the five corners of my beard!” shouted the Pharisee, who belonged
      to the sect called The Dashers (that little knot of saints whose manner of
      _dashing _and lacerating the feet against the pavement was long a
      thorn and a reproach to less zealous devotees—a stumbling-block to less
      gifted perambulators)—“by the five corners of that beard which, as a
      priest, I am forbidden to shave!—have we lived to see the day when a
      blaspheming and idolatrous upstart of Rome shall accuse us of
      appropriating to the appetites of the flesh the most holy and consecrated
      elements? Have we lived to see the day when—”

      “Let us not question the motives of the Philistine,” interrupted
      Abel-Phittim, “for to-day we profit for the first time by his avarice or
      by his generosity; but rather let us hurry to the ramparts, lest offerings
      should be wanting for that altar whose fire the rains of heaven can not
      extinguish, and whose pillars of smoke no tempest can turn aside.”


      That part of the city to which our worthy Gizbarim now hastened, and which
      bore the name of its architect, King David, was esteemed the most strongly
      fortified district of Jerusalem; being situated upon the steep and lofty
      hill of Zion. Here, a broad, deep, circumvallatory trench, hewn from the
      solid rock, was defended by a wall of great strength erected upon its
      inner edge. This wall was adorned, at regular interspaces, by square
      towers of white marble; the lowest sixty, and the highest one hundred and
      twenty cubits in height. But, in the vicinity of the gate of Benjamin, the
      wall arose by no means from the margin of the fosse. On the contrary,
      between the level of the ditch and the basement of the rampart sprang up a
      perpendicular cliff of two hundred and fifty cubits, forming part of the
      precipitous Mount Moriah. So that when Simeon and his associates arrived
      on the summit of the tower called Adoni-Bezek—the loftiest of all the
      turrets around about Jerusalem, and the usual place of conference with the
      besieging army—they looked down upon the camp of the enemy from an
      eminence excelling by many feet that of the Pyramid of Cheops, and, by
      several, that of the temple of Belus.

      “Verily,” sighed the Pharisee, as he peered dizzily over the precipice,
      “the uncircumcised are as the sands by the seashore—as the locusts in the
      wilderness! The valley of the King hath become the valley of Adommin.”


      “And yet,” added Ben-Levi, “thou canst not point me out a Philistine—no,
      not one—from Aleph to Tau—from the wilderness to the battlements—who
      seemeth any bigger than the letter Jod!”


      “Lower away the basket with the shekels of silver!” here shouted a Roman
      soldier in a hoarse, rough voice, which appeared to issue from the regions
      of Pluto—“lower away the basket with the accursed coin which it has
      broken the jaw of a noble Roman to pronounce! Is it thus you evince your
      gratitude to our master Pompeius, who, in his condescension, has thought
      fit to listen to your idolatrous importunities? The god Phœbus, who is a
      true god, has been charioted for an hour—and were you not to be on the
      ramparts by sunrise? Ædepol! do you think that we, the conquerors of the
      world, have nothing better to do than stand waiting by the walls of every
      kennel, to traffic with the dogs of the earth? Lower away! I say—and
      see that your trumpery be bright in color and just in weight!”


      “El Elohim!” ejaculated the Pharisee, as the discordant tones of the
      centurion rattled up the crags of the precipice, and fainted away against
      the temple—“El Elohim!—who is the god Phœbus?—whom doth
      the blasphemer invoke? Thou, Buzi-Ben-Levi! who art read in the laws of
      the Gentiles, and hast sojourned among them who dabble with the Teraphim!—is
      it Nergal of whom the idolater speaketh?—or Ashimah?—or
      Nibhaz,—or Tartak?—or Adramalech?—or Anamalech?—or
      Succoth-Benith?—or Dagon?—or Belial?—or Baal-Perith?—or
      Baal-Peor?—or Baal-Zebub?”


      “Verily it is neither—but beware how thou lettest the rope slip too
      rapidly through thy fingers; for should the wicker-work chance to hang on
      the projection of yonder crag, there will be a woful outpouring of the
      holy things of the sanctuary.”


      By the assistance of some rudely constructed machinery, the heavily laden
      basket was now carefully lowered down among the multitude; and, from the
      giddy pinnacle, the Romans were seen gathering confusedly round it; but
      owing to the vast height and the prevalence of a fog, no distinct view of
      their operations could be obtained.

      Half an hour had already elapsed.

      “We shall be too late!” sighed the Pharisee, as at the expiration of this
      period he looked over into the abyss—“we shall be too late! we shall be
      turned out of office by the Katholim.”


      “No more,” responded Abel-Phittim—“no more shall we feast upon the
      fat of the land—no longer shall our beards be odorous with frankincense—our
      loins girded up with fine linen from the Temple.”


      “Raca!” swore Ben-Levi, “Raca! do they mean to defraud us of the purchase
      money? or, Holy Moses! are they weighing the shekels of the tabernacle?”


      “They have given the signal at last!” cried the Pharisee—“they
      have given the signal at last! pull away, Abel-Phittim!—and thou,
      Buzi-Ben-Levi, pull away!—for verily the Philistines have either
      still hold upon the basket, or the Lord hath softened their hearts to
      place therein a beast of good weight!” And the Gizbarim pulled away, while
      their burden swung heavily upward through the still increasing mist.




      “Booshoh he!”—as, at the conclusion of an hour, some object at the
      extremity of the rope became indistinctly visible—“Booshoh he!” was
      the exclamation which burst from the lips of Ben-Levi.

      “Booshoh he!—for shame!—it is a ram from the thickets of
      Engedi, and as rugged as the valley of Jehosaphat!”


      “It is a firstling of the flock,” said Abel-Phittim, “I know him by the
      bleating of his lips, and the innocent folding of his limbs. His eyes are
      more beautiful than the jewels of the Pectoral, and his flesh is like the
      honey of Hebron.”


      “It is a fatted calf from the pastures of Bashan,” said the Pharisee, “the
      heathen have dealt wonderfully with us——let us raise up our
      voices in a psalm—let us give thanks on the shawm and on the
      psaltery—on the harp and on the huggab—on the cythern and on the sackbut!”


      It was not until the basket had arrived within a few feet of the Gizbarim
      that a low grunt betrayed to their perception a _hog_ of no common size.

      “Now El Emanu!” slowly and with upturned eyes ejaculated the trio, as,
      letting go their hold, the emancipated porker tumbled headlong among the
      Philistines, “El Emanu!—God be with us—it is _the unutterable
      flesh!”_



End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Works of Edgar Allan Poe, Volume 5, by Edgar Allan Poe

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WORKS OF EDGAR ALLAN POE, VOL. 5 ***

***** This file should be named 2151-0.txt or 2151-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/5/2151/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
