The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Works of Edgar Allan Poe, Volume 4, by Edgar Allan Poe

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Works of Edgar Allan Poe, Volume 4

Author: Edgar Allan Poe

Release Date: April, 2000  [Etext #2150]
[Most recently updated: December 12, 2020]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WORKS OF EDGAR ALLAN POE, VOL. 4 ***



THE LANDSCAPE GARDEN


     The garden like a lady fair was cut
         That lay as if she slumbered in delight,
     And to the open skies her eyes did shut;
         The azure fields of heaven were ’sembled right
         In a large round set with flow’rs of light:
     The flowers de luce and the round sparks of dew
     That hung upon their azure leaves, did show
     Like twinkling stars that sparkle in the ev’ning blue.
                    —GILES FLETCHER

      No more remarkable man ever lived than my friend, the young
      Ellison. He was remarkable in the entire and continuous profusion
      of good gifts ever lavished upon him by fortune. From his cradle
      to his grave, a gale of the blandest prosperity bore him along.
      Nor do I use the word Prosperity in its mere wordly or external
      sense. I mean it as synonymous with happiness. The person of whom
      I speak, seemed born for the purpose of foreshadowing the wild
      doctrines of Turgot, Price, Priestley, and Condorcet—of
      exemplifying, by individual instance, what has been deemed the
      mere chimera of the perfectionists. In the brief existence of
      Ellison, I fancy, that I have seen refuted the dogma—that in
      man’s physical and spiritual nature, lies some hidden principle,
      the antagonist of Bliss. An intimate and anxious examination of
      his career, has taught me to understand that, in general, from
      the violation of a few simple laws of Humanity, arises the
      Wretchedness of mankind; that, as a species, we have in our
      possession the as yet unwrought elements of Content,—and that
      even now, in the present blindness and darkness of all idea on
      the great question of the Social Condition, it is not impossible
      that Man, the individual, under certain unusual and highly
      fortuitous conditions, may be happy.

      With opinions such as these was my young friend fully imbued; and
      thus is it especially worthy of observation that the
      uninterrupted enjoyment which distinguished his life was in great
      part the result of preconcert. It is, indeed evident, that with
      less of the instinctive philosophy which, now and then, stands so
      well in the stead of experience, Mr. Ellison would have found
      himself precipitated, by the very extraordinary successes of his
      life, into the common vortex of Unhappiness which yawns for those
      of preeminent endowments. But it is by no means my present object
      to pen an essay on Happiness. The ideas of my friend may be
      summed up in a few words. He admitted but four unvarying laws, or
      rather elementary principles, of Bliss. That which he considered
      chief, was (strange to say!) the simple and purely physical one
      of free exercise in the open air. “The health,” he said,
      “attainable by other means than this is scarcely worth the name.”
      He pointed to the tillers of the earth—the only people who, as a
      class, are proverbially more happy than others—and then he
      instanced the high ecstasies of the fox-hunter. His second
      principle was the love of woman. His third was the contempt of
      ambition. His fourth was an object of unceasing pursuit; and he
      held that, other things being equal, the extent of happiness was
      proportioned to the spirituality of this object.

      I have said that Ellison was remarkable in the continuous
      profusion of good gifts lavished upon him by Fortune. In personal
      grace and beauty he exceeded all men. His intellect was of that
      order to which the attainment of knowledge is less a labor than a
      necessity and an intuition. His family was one of the most
      illustrious of the empire. His bride was the loveliest and most
      devoted of women. His possessions had been always ample; but,
      upon the attainment of his one and twentieth year, it was
      discovered that one of those extraordinary freaks of Fate had
      been played in his behalf which startle the whole social world
      amid which they occur, and seldom fail radically to alter the
      entire moral constitution of those who are their objects. It
      appears that about one hundred years prior to Mr. Ellison’s
      attainment of his majority, there had died, in a remote province,
      one Mr. Seabright Ellison. This gentlemen had amassed a princely
      fortune, and, having no very immediate connexions, conceived the
      whim of suffering his wealth to accumulate for a century after
      his decease. Minutely and sagaciously directing the various modes
      of investment, he bequeathed the aggregate amount to the nearest
      of blood, bearing the name Ellison, who should be alive at the
      end of the hundred years. Many futile attempts had been made to
      set aside this singular bequest; their ex post facto character
      rendered them abortive; but the attention of a jealous government
      was aroused, and a decree finally obtained, forbidding all
      similar accumulations. This act did not prevent young Ellison,
      upon his twenty-first birth-day, from entering into possession,
      as the heir of his ancestor, Seabright, of a fortune of four
      hundred and fifty millions of dollars. {*1}

      When it had become definitely known that such was the enormous
      wealth inherited, there were, of course, many speculations as to
      the mode of its disposal. The gigantic magnitude and the
      immediately available nature of the sum, dazzled and bewildered
      all who thought upon the topic. The possessor of any appreciable
      amount of money might have been imagined to perform any one of a
      thousand things. With riches merely surpassing those of any
      citizen, it would have been easy to suppose him engaging to
      supreme excess in the fashionable extravagances of his time; or
      busying himself with political intrigues; or aiming at
      ministerial power; or purchasing increase of nobility, or
      devising gorgeous architectural piles; or collecting large
      specimens of Virtu; or playing the munificent patron of Letters
      and Art; or endowing and bestowing his name upon extensive
      institutions of charity. But, for the inconceivable wealth in the
      actual possession of the young heir, these objects and all
      ordinary objects were felt to be inadequate. Recourse was had to
      figures; and figures but sufficed to confound. It was seen, that
      even at three per cent, the annual income of the inheritance
      amounted to no less than thirteen millions and five hundred
      thousand dollars; which was one million and one hundred and
      twenty-five thousand per month; or thirty-six thousand, nine
      hundred and eighty-six per day, or one thousand five hundred and
      forty-one per hour, or six and twenty dollars for every minute
      that flew. Thus the usual track of supposition was thoroughly
      broken up. Men knew not what to imagine. There were some who even
      conceived that Mr. Ellison would divest himself forthwith of at
      least two-thirds of his fortune as of utterly superfluous
      opulence; enriching whole troops of his relatives by division of
      his superabundance.

      I was not surprised, however, to perceive that he had long made
      up his mind upon a topic which had occasioned so much of
      discussion to his friends. Nor was I greatly astonished at the
      nature of his decision. In the widest and noblest sense, he was a
      poet. He comprehended, moreover, the true character, the august
      aims, the supreme majesty and dignity of the poetic sentiment.
      The proper gratification of the sentiment he instinctively felt
      to lie in the creation of novel forms of Beauty. Some
      peculiarities, either in his early education, or in the nature of
      his intellect, had tinged with what is termed materialism the
      whole cast of his ethical speculations; and it was this bias,
      perhaps, which imperceptibly led him to perceive that the most
      advantageous, if not the sole legitimate field for the exercise
      of the poetic sentiment, was to be found in the creation of novel
      moods of purely physical loveliness. Thus it happened that he
      became neither musician nor poet; if we use this latter term in
      its every-day acceptation. Or it might have been that he became
      neither the one nor the other, in pursuance of an idea of his
      which I have already mentioned—the idea, that in the contempt of
      ambition lay one of the essential principles of happiness on
      earth. Is it not, indeed, possible that while a high order of
      genius is necessarily ambitious, the highest is invariably above
      that which is termed ambition? And may it not thus happen that
      many far greater than Milton, have contentedly remained “mute and
      inglorious?” I believe the world has never yet seen, and that,
      unless through some series of accidents goading the noblest order
      of mind into distasteful exertion, the world will never behold,
      that full extent of triumphant execution, in the richer
      productions of Art, of which the human nature is absolutely
      capable.

      Mr. Ellison became neither musician nor poet; although no man
      lived more profoundly enamored both of Music and the Muse. Under
      other circumstances than those which invested him, it is not
      impossible that he would have become a painter. The field of
      sculpture, although in its nature rigidly poetical, was too
      limited in its extent and in its consequences, to have occupied,
      at any time, much of his attention. And I have now mentioned all
      the provinces in which even the most liberal understanding of the
      poetic sentiment has declared this sentiment capable of
      expatiating. I mean the most liberal public or recognized
      conception of the idea involved in the phrase “poetic sentiment.”
      But Mr. Ellison imagined that the richest, and altogether the
      most natural and most suitable province, had been blindly
      neglected. No definition had spoken of the Landscape-Gardener, as
      of the poet; yet my friend could not fail to perceive that the
      creation of the Landscape-Garden offered to the true muse the
      most magnificent of opportunities. Here was, indeed, the fairest
      field for the display of invention, or imagination, in the
      endless combining of forms of novel Beauty; the elements which
      should enter into combination being, at all times, and by a vast
      superiority, the most glorious which the earth could afford. In
      the multiform of the tree, and in the multicolor of the flower,
      he recognized the most direct and the most energetic efforts of
      Nature at physical loveliness. And in the direction or
      concentration of this effort, or, still more properly, in its
      adaption to the eyes which were to behold it upon earth, he
      perceived that he should be employing the best means—laboring to
      the greatest advantage—in the fulfilment of his destiny as Poet.

      “Its adaptation to the eyes which were to behold it upon earth.”
      In his explanation of this phraseology, Mr. Ellison did much
      towards solving what has always seemed to me an enigma. I mean
      the fact (which none but the ignorant dispute) that no such
      combinations of scenery exist in Nature as the painter of genius
      has in his power to produce. No such Paradises are to be found in
      reality as have glowed upon the canvass of Claude. In the most
      enchanting of natural landscapes, there will always be found a
      defect or an excess—many excesses and defects. While the
      component parts may exceed, individually, the highest skill of
      the artist, the arrangement of the parts will always be
      susceptible of improvement. In short, no position can be
      attained, from which an artistical eye, looking steadily, will
      not find matter of offence, in what is technically termed the
      composition of a natural landscape. And yet how unintelligible is
      this! In all other matters we are justly instructed to regard
      Nature as supreme. With her details we shrink from competition.
      Who shall presume to imitate the colors of the tulip, or to
      improve the proportions of the lily of the valley? The criticism
      which says, of sculpture or of portraiture, that “Nature is to be
      exalted rather than imitated,” is in error. No pictorial or
      sculptural combinations of points of human loveliness, do more
      than approach the living and breathing human beauty as it
      gladdens our daily path. Byron, who often erred, erred not in
      saying, I’ve seen more living beauty, ripe and real, than all the
      nonsense of their stone ideal. In landscape alone is the
      principle of the critic true; and, having felt its truth here, it
      is but the headlong spirit of generalization which has induced
      him to pronounce it true throughout all the domains of Art.
      Having, I say, felt its truth here. For the feeling is no
      affectation or chimera. The mathematics afford no more absolute
      demonstrations, than the sentiment of his Art yields to the
      artist. He not only believes, but positively knows, that such and
      such apparently arbitrary arrangements of matter, or form,
      constitute, and alone constitute, the true Beauty. Yet his
      reasons have not yet been matured into expression. It remains for
      a more profound analysis than the world has yet seen, fully to
      investigate and express them. Nevertheless is he confirmed in his
      instinctive opinions, by the concurrence of all his compeers. Let
      a composition be defective; let an emendation be wrought in its
      mere arrangement of form; let this emendation be submitted to
      every artist in the world; by each will its necessity be
      admitted. And even far more than this, in remedy of the defective
      composition, each insulated member of the fraternity will suggest
      the identical emendation.

      I repeat that in landscape arrangements, or collocations alone,
      is the physical Nature susceptible of “exaltation” and that,
      therefore, her susceptibility of improvement at this one point,
      was a mystery which, hitherto I had been unable to solve. It was
      Mr. Ellison who first suggested the idea that what we regarded as
      improvement or exaltation of the natural beauty, was really such,
      as respected only the mortal or human point of view; that each
      alteration or disturbance of the primitive scenery might possibly
      effect a blemish in the picture, if we could suppose this picture
      viewed at large from some remote point in the heavens. “It is
      easily understood,” says Mr. Ellison, “that what might improve a
      closely scrutinized detail, might, at the same time, injure a
      general and more distantly observed effect.” He spoke upon this
      topic with warmth: regarding not so much its immediate or obvious
      importance (which is little), as the character of the conclusions
      to which it might lead, or of the collateral propositions which
      it might serve to corroborate or sustain. There might be a class
      of beings, human once, but now to humanity invisible, for whose
      scrutiny and for whose refined appreciation of the beautiful,
      more especially than for our own, had been set in order by God
      the great landscape-garden of the whole earth.

      In the course of our discussion, my young friend took occasion to
      quote some passages from a writer who has been supposed to have
      well treated this theme.

      “There are, properly,” he writes, “but two styles of
      landscape-gardening, the natural and the artificial. One seeks to
      recall the original beauty of the country, by adapting its means
      to the surrounding scenery; cultivating trees in harmony with the
      hills or plain of the neighboring land; detecting and bringing
      into practice those nice relations of size, proportion and color
      which, hid from the common observer, are revealed everywhere to
      the experienced student of nature. The result of the natural
      style of gardening, is seen rather in the absence of all defects
      and incongruities—in the prevalence of a beautiful harmony and
      order, than in the creation of any special wonders or miracles.
      The artificial style has as many varieties as there are different
      tastes to gratify. It has a certain general relation to the
      various styles of building. There are the stately avenues and
      retirements of Versailles; Italian terraces; and a various mixed
      old English style, which bears some relation to the domestic
      Gothic or English Elizabethan architecture. Whatever may be said
      against the abuses of the artificial landscape-gardening, a
      mixture of pure art in a garden scene, adds to it a great beauty.
      This is partly pleasing to the eye, by the show of order and
      design, and partly moral. A terrace, with an old moss-covered
      balustrade, calls up at once to the eye, the fair forms that have
      passed there in other days. The slightest exhibition of art is an
      evidence of care and human interest.”

      “From what I have already observed,” said Mr. Ellison, “you will
      understand that I reject the idea, here expressed, of ‘recalling
      the original beauty of the country.’ The original beauty is never
      so great as that which may be introduced. Of course, much depends
      upon the selection of a spot with capabilities. What is said in
      respect to the ‘detecting and bringing into practice those nice
      relations of size, proportion and color,’ is a mere vagueness of
      speech, which may mean much, or little, or nothing, and which
      guides in no degree. That the true ‘result of the natural style
      of gardening is seen rather in the absence of all defects and
      incongruities, than in the creation of any special wonders or
      miracles,’ is a proposition better suited to the grovelling
      apprehension of the herd, than to the fervid dreams of the man of
      genius. The merit suggested is, at best, negative, and appertains
      to that hobbling criticism which, in letters, would elevate
      Addison into apotheosis. In truth, while that merit which
      consists in the mere avoiding demerit, appeals directly to the
      understanding, and can thus be foreshadowed in Rule, the loftier
      merit, which breathes and flames in invention or creation, can be
      apprehended solely in its results. Rule applies but to the
      excellences of avoidance—to the virtues which deny or refrain.
      Beyond these the critical art can but suggest. We may be
      instructed to build an Odyssey, but it is in vain that we are
      told how to conceive a ‘Tempest,’ an ‘Inferno,’ a ‘Prometheus
      Bound,’ a ‘Nightingale,’ such as that of Keats, or the ‘Sensitive
      Plant’ of Shelley. But, the thing done, the wonder accomplished,
      and the capacity for apprehension becomes universal. The sophists
      of the negative school, who, through inability to create, have
      scoffed at creation, are now found the loudest in applause. What,
      in its chrysalis condition of principle, affronted their demure
      reason, never fails, in its maturity of accomplishment, to extort
      admiration from their instinct of the beautiful or of the
      sublime.

      “Our author’s observations on the artificial style of gardening,”
      continued Mr. Ellison, “are less objectionable. ‘A mixture of
      pure art in a garden scene, adds to it a great beauty.’ This is
      just, and the reference to the sense of human interest is equally
      so. I repeat that the principle here expressed, is
      incontrovertible; but there may be something even beyond it.
      There may be an object in full keeping with the principle
      suggested—an object unattainable by the means ordinarily in
      possession of mankind, yet which, if attained, would lend a charm
      to the landscape-garden immeasurably surpassing that which a
      merely human interest could bestow. The true poet possessed of
      very unusual pecuniary resources, might possibly, while retaining
      the necessary idea of art or interest or culture, so imbue his
      designs at once with extent and novelty of Beauty, as to convey
      the sentiment of spiritual interference. It will be seen that, in
      bringing about such result, he secures all the advantages of
      interest or design, while relieving his work of all the harshness
      and technicality of Art. In the most rugged of wildernesses—in
      the most savage of the scenes of pure Nature—there is apparent
      the art of a Creator; yet is this art apparent only to
      reflection; in no respect has it the obvious force of a feeling.
      Now, if we imagine this sense of the Almighty Design to be
      harmonized in a measurable degree, if we suppose a landscape
      whose combined strangeness, vastness, definitiveness, and
      magnificence, shall inspire the idea of culture, or care, or
      superintendence, on the part of intelligences superior yet akin
      to humanity—then the sentiment of interest is preserved, while
      the Art is made to assume the air of an intermediate or secondary
      Nature—a Nature which is not God, nor an emanation of God, but
      which still is Nature, in the sense that it is the handiwork of
      the angels that hover between man and God.”

      It was in devoting his gigantic wealth to the practical
      embodiment of a vision such as this—in the free exercise in the
      open air, which resulted from personal direction of his plans—in
      the continuous and unceasing object which these plans afforded—in
      the high spirituality of the object itself—in the contempt of
      ambition which it enabled him more to feel than to affect—and,
      lastly, it was in the companionship and sympathy of a devoted
      wife, that Ellison thought to find, and found, an exemption from
      the ordinary cares of Humanity, with a far greater amount of
      positive happiness than ever glowed in the rapt day-dreams of De
      Staël.



End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Works of Edgar Allan Poe, Volume 4, by Edgar Allan Poe

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WORKS OF EDGAR ALLAN POE, VOL. 4 ***

***** This file should be named 2150-0.txt or 2150-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/5/2150/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
