The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Works of Edgar Allan Poe, Volume 4, by Edgar Allan Poe

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Works of Edgar Allan Poe, Volume 4

Author: Edgar Allan Poe

Release Date: April, 2000  [Etext #2150]
[Most recently updated: December 12, 2020]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WORKS OF EDGAR ALLAN POE, VOL. 4 ***


THE OBLONG BOX.


      Some years ago, I engaged passage from Charleston, S. C., to the
      city of New York, in the fine packet-ship “Independence,” Captain
      Hardy. We were to sail on the fifteenth of the month (June),
      weather permitting; and on the fourteenth, I went on board to
      arrange some matters in my state-room.

      I found that we were to have a great many passengers, including a
      more than usual number of ladies. On the list were several of my
      acquaintances, and among other names, I was rejoiced to see that
      of Mr. Cornelius Wyatt, a young artist, for whom I entertained
      feelings of warm friendship. He had been with me a fellow-student
      at C—— University, where we were very much together. He had the
      ordinary temperament of genius, and was a compound of
      misanthropy, sensibility, and enthusiasm. To these qualities he
      united the warmest and truest heart which ever beat in a human
      bosom.

      I observed that his name was carded upon three state-rooms; and,
      upon again referring to the list of passengers, I found that he
      had engaged passage for himself, wife, and two sisters—his own.
      The state-rooms were sufficiently roomy, and each had two berths,
      one above the other. These berths, to be sure, were so
      exceedingly narrow as to be insufficient for more than one
      person; still, I could not comprehend why there were three
      state-rooms for these four persons. I was, just at that epoch, in
      one of those moody frames of mind which make a man abnormally
      inquisitive about trifles: and I confess, with shame, that I
      busied myself in a variety of ill-bred and preposterous
      conjectures about this matter of the supernumerary state-room. It
      was no business of mine, to be sure, but with none the less
      pertinacity did I occupy myself in attempts to resolve the
      enigma. At last I reached a conclusion which wrought in me great
      wonder why I had not arrived at it before. “It is a servant of
      course,” I said; “what a fool I am, not sooner to have thought of
      so obvious a solution!” And then I again repaired to the list—but
      here I saw distinctly that no servant was to come with the party,
      although, in fact, it had been the original design to bring
      one—for the words “and servant” had been first written and then
      overscored. “Oh, extra baggage, to be sure,” I now said to
      myself—“something he wishes not to be put in the hold—something
      to be kept under his own eye—ah, I have it—a painting or so—and
      this is what he has been bargaining about with Nicolino, the
      Italian Jew.” This idea satisfied me, and I dismissed my
      curiosity for the nonce.

      Wyatt’s two sisters I knew very well, and most amiable and clever
      girls they were. His wife he had newly married, and I had never
      yet seen her. He had often talked about her in my presence,
      however, and in his usual style of enthusiasm. He described her
      as of surpassing beauty, wit, and accomplishment. I was,
      therefore, quite anxious to make her acquaintance.

      On the day in which I visited the ship (the fourteenth), Wyatt
      and party were also to visit it—so the captain informed me—and I
      waited on board an hour longer than I had designed, in hope of
      being presented to the bride, but then an apology came. “Mrs. W.
      was a little indisposed, and would decline coming on board until
      to-morrow, at the hour of sailing.”

      The morrow having arrived, I was going from my hotel to the
      wharf, when Captain Hardy met me and said that, “owing to
      circumstances” (a stupid but convenient phrase), “he rather
      thought the ‘Independence’ would not sail for a day or two, and
      that when all was ready, he would send up and let me know.” This
      I thought strange, for there was a stiff southerly breeze; but as
      “the circumstances” were not forthcoming, although I pumped for
      them with much perseverance, I had nothing to do but to return
      home and digest my impatience at leisure.

      I did not receive the expected message from the captain for
      nearly a week. It came at length, however, and I immediately went
      on board. The ship was crowded with passengers, and every thing
      was in the bustle attendant upon making sail. Wyatt’s party
      arrived in about ten minutes after myself. There were the two
      sisters, the bride, and the artist—the latter in one of his
      customary fits of moody misanthropy. I was too well used to
      these, however, to pay them any special attention. He did not
      even introduce me to his wife—this courtesy devolving, per force,
      upon his sister Marian—a very sweet and intelligent girl, who, in
      a few hurried words, made us acquainted.

      Mrs. Wyatt had been closely veiled; and when she raised her veil,
      in acknowledging my bow, I confess that I was very profoundly
      astonished. I should have been much more so, however, had not
      long experience advised me not to trust, with too implicit a
      reliance, the enthusiastic descriptions of my friend, the artist,
      when indulging in comments upon the loveliness of woman. When
      beauty was the theme, I well knew with what facility he soared
      into the regions of the purely ideal.

      The truth is, I could not help regarding Mrs. Wyatt as a
      decidedly plain-looking woman. If not positively ugly, she was
      not, I think, very far from it. She was dressed, however, in
      exquisite taste—and then I had no doubt that she had captivated
      my friend’s heart by the more enduring graces of the intellect
      and soul. She said very few words, and passed at once into her
      state-room with Mr. W.

      My old inquisitiveness now returned. There was no servant—that
      was a settled point. I looked, therefore, for the extra baggage.
      After some delay, a cart arrived at the wharf, with an oblong
      pine box, which was every thing that seemed to be expected.
      Immediately upon its arrival we made sail, and in a short time
      were safely over the bar and standing out to sea.

      The box in question was, as I say, oblong. It was about six feet
      in length by two and a half in breadth; I observed it
      attentively, and like to be precise. Now this shape was peculiar;
      and no sooner had I seen it, than I took credit to myself for the
      accuracy of my guessing. I had reached the conclusion, it will be
      remembered, that the extra baggage of my friend, the artist,
      would prove to be pictures, or at least a picture; for I knew he
      had been for several weeks in conference with Nicolino:—and now
      here was a box, which, from its shape, could possibly contain
      nothing in the world but a copy of Leonardo’s “Last Supper;” and
      a copy of this very “Last Supper,” done by Rubini the younger, at
      Florence, I had known, for some time, to be in the possession of
      Nicolino. This point, therefore, I considered as sufficiently
      settled. I chuckled excessively when I thought of my acumen. It
      was the first time I had ever known Wyatt to keep from me any of
      his artistical secrets; but here he evidently intended to steal a
      march upon me, and smuggle a fine picture to New York, under my
      very nose; expecting me to know nothing of the matter. I resolved
      to quiz him well, now and hereafter.

      One thing, however, annoyed me not a little. The box did not go
      into the extra state-room. It was deposited in Wyatt’s own; and
      there, too, it remained, occupying very nearly the whole of the
      floor—no doubt to the exceeding discomfort of the artist and his
      wife;—this the more especially as the tar or paint with which it
      was lettered in sprawling capitals, emitted a strong,
      disagreeable, and, to my fancy, a peculiarly disgusting odor. On
      the lid were painted the words—“Mrs. Adelaide Curtis, Albany, New
      York. Charge of Cornelius Wyatt, Esq. This side up. To be handled
      with care.”

      Now, I was aware that Mrs. Adelaide Curtis, of Albany, was the
      artist’s wife’s mother,—but then I looked upon the whole address
      as a mystification, intended especially for myself. I made up my
      mind, of course, that the box and contents would never get
      farther north than the studio of my misanthropic friend, in
      Chambers Street, New York.

      For the first three or four days we had fine weather, although
      the wind was dead ahead; having chopped round to the northward,
      immediately upon our losing sight of the coast. The passengers
      were, consequently, in high spirits and disposed to be social. I
      must except, however, Wyatt and his sisters, who behaved stiffly,
      and, I could not help thinking, uncourteously to the rest of the
      party. Wyatt’s conduct I did not so much regard. He was gloomy,
      even beyond his usual habit—in fact he was morose—but in him I
      was prepared for eccentricity. For the sisters, however, I could
      make no excuse. They secluded themselves in their staterooms
      during the greater part of the passage, and absolutely refused,
      although I repeatedly urged them, to hold communication with any
      person on board.

      Mrs. Wyatt herself was far more agreeable. That is to say, she
      was chatty; and to be chatty is no slight recommendation at sea.
      She became excessively intimate with most of the ladies; and, to
      my profound astonishment, evinced no equivocal disposition to
      coquet with the men. She amused us all very much. I say
      “amused”—and scarcely know how to explain myself. The truth is, I
      soon found that Mrs. W. was far oftener laughed at than with. The
      gentlemen said little about her; but the ladies, in a little
      while, pronounced her “a good-hearted thing, rather indifferent
      looking, totally uneducated, and decidedly vulgar.” The great
      wonder was, how Wyatt had been entrapped into such a match.
      Wealth was the general solution—but this I knew to be no solution
      at all; for Wyatt had told me that she neither brought him a
      dollar nor had any expectations from any source whatever. “He had
      married,” he said, “for love, and for love only; and his bride
      was far more than worthy of his love.” When I thought of these
      expressions, on the part of my friend, I confess that I felt
      indescribably puzzled. Could it be possible that he was taking
      leave of his senses? What else could I think? He, so refined, so
      intellectual, so fastidious, with so exquisite a perception of
      the faulty, and so keen an appreciation of the beautiful! To be
      sure, the lady seemed especially fond of him—particularly so in
      his absence—when she made herself ridiculous by frequent
      quotations of what had been said by her “beloved husband, Mr.
      Wyatt.” The word “husband” seemed forever—to use one of her own
      delicate expressions—forever “on the tip of her tongue.” In the
      meantime, it was observed by all on board, that he avoided her in
      the most pointed manner, and, for the most part, shut himself up
      alone in his state-room, where, in fact, he might have been said
      to live altogether, leaving his wife at full liberty to amuse
      herself as she thought best, in the public society of the main
      cabin.

      My conclusion, from what I saw and heard, was, that, the artist,
      by some unaccountable freak of fate, or perhaps in some fit of
      enthusiastic and fanciful passion, had been induced to unite
      himself with a person altogether beneath him, and that the
      natural result, entire and speedy disgust, had ensued. I pitied
      him from the bottom of my heart—but could not, for that reason,
      quite forgive his incommunicativeness in the matter of the “Last
      Supper.” For this I resolved to have my revenge.

      One day he came upon deck, and, taking his arm as had been my
      wont, I sauntered with him backward and forward. His gloom,
      however (which I considered quite natural under the
      circumstances), seemed entirely unabated. He said little, and
      that moodily, and with evident effort. I ventured a jest or two,
      and he made a sickening attempt at a smile. Poor fellow!—as I
      thought of his wife, I wondered that he could have heart to put
      on even the semblance of mirth. I determined to commence a series
      of covert insinuations, or innuendoes, about the oblong box—just
      to let him perceive, gradually, that I was not altogether the
      butt, or victim, of his little bit of pleasant mystification. My
      first observation was by way of opening a masked battery. I said
      something about the “peculiar shape of _that_ box”; and, as I
      spoke the words, I smiled knowingly, winked, and touched him
      gently with my forefinger in the ribs.

      The manner in which Wyatt received this harmless pleasantry
      convinced me, at once, that he was mad. At first he stared at me
      as if he found it impossible to comprehend the witticism of my
      remark; but as its point seemed slowly to make its way into his
      brain, his eyes, in the same proportion, seemed protruding from
      their sockets. Then he grew very red—then hideously pale—then, as
      if highly amused with what I had insinuated, he began a loud and
      boisterous laugh, which, to my astonishment, he kept up, with
      gradually increasing vigor, for ten minutes or more. In
      conclusion, he fell flat and heavily upon the deck. When I ran to
      uplift him, to all appearance he was dead.

      I called assistance, and, with much difficulty, we brought him to
      himself. Upon reviving he spoke incoherently for some time. At
      length we bled him and put him to bed. The next morning he was
      quite recovered, so far as regarded his mere bodily health. Of
      his mind I say nothing, of course. I avoided him during the rest
      of the passage, by advice of the captain, who seemed to coincide
      with me altogether in my views of his insanity, but cautioned me
      to say nothing on this head to any person on board.

      Several circumstances occurred immediately after this fit of
      Wyatt which contributed to heighten the curiosity with which I
      was already possessed. Among other things, this: I had been
      nervous—drank too much strong green tea, and slept ill at
      night—in fact, for two nights I could not be properly said to
      sleep at all. Now, my state-room opened into the main cabin, or
      dining-room, as did those of all the single men on board. Wyatt’s
      three rooms were in the after-cabin, which was separated from the
      main one by a slight sliding door, never locked even at night. As
      we were almost constantly on a wind, and the breeze was not a
      little stiff, the ship heeled to leeward very considerably; and
      whenever her starboard side was to leeward, the sliding door
      between the cabins slid open, and so remained, nobody taking the
      trouble to get up and shut it. But my berth was in such a
      position, that when my own state-room door was open, as well as
      the sliding door in question (and my own door was always open on
      account of the heat,) I could see into the after-cabin quite
      distinctly, and just at that portion of it, too, where were
      situated the state-rooms of Mr. Wyatt. Well, during two nights
      (not consecutive) while I lay awake, I clearly saw Mrs. W., about
      eleven o’clock upon each night, steal cautiously from the
      state-room of Mr. W., and enter the extra room, where she
      remained until daybreak, when she was called by her husband and
      went back. That they were virtually separated was clear. They had
      separate apartments—no doubt in contemplation of a more permanent
      divorce; and here, after all I thought was the mystery of the
      extra state-room.

      There was another circumstance, too, which interested me much.
      During the two wakeful nights in question, and immediately after
      the disappearance of Mrs. Wyatt into the extra state-room, I was
      attracted by certain singular cautious, subdued noises in that of
      her husband. After listening to them for some time, with
      thoughtful attention, I at length succeeded perfectly in
      translating their import. They were sounds occasioned by the
      artist in prying open the oblong box, by means of a chisel and
      mallet—the latter being apparently muffled, or deadened, by some
      soft woollen or cotton substance in which its head was enveloped.

      In this manner I fancied I could distinguish the precise moment
      when he fairly disengaged the lid—also, that I could determine
      when he removed it altogether, and when he deposited it upon the
      lower berth in his room; this latter point I knew, for example,
      by certain slight taps which the lid made in striking against the
      wooden edges of the berth, as he endeavored to lay it down very
      gently—there being no room for it on the floor. After this there
      was a dead stillness, and I heard nothing more, upon either
      occasion, until nearly daybreak; unless, perhaps, I may mention a
      low sobbing, or murmuring sound, so very much suppressed as to be
      nearly inaudible—if, indeed, the whole of this latter noise were
      not rather produced by my own imagination. I say it seemed to
      resemble sobbing or sighing—but, of course, it could not have
      been either. I rather think it was a ringing in my own ears. Mr.
      Wyatt, no doubt, according to custom, was merely giving the rein
      to one of his hobbies—indulging in one of his fits of artistic
      enthusiasm. He had opened his oblong box, in order to feast his
      eyes on the pictorial treasure within. There was nothing in this,
      however, to make him sob. I repeat, therefore, that it must have
      been simply a freak of my own fancy, distempered by good Captain
      Hardy’s green tea. Just before dawn, on each of the two nights of
      which I speak, I distinctly heard Mr. Wyatt replace the lid upon
      the oblong box, and force the nails into their old places by
      means of the muffled mallet. Having done this, he issued from his
      state-room, fully dressed, and proceeded to call Mrs. W. from
      hers.

      We had been at sea seven days, and were now off Cape Hatteras,
      when there came a tremendously heavy blow from the southwest. We
      were, in a measure, prepared for it, however, as the weather had
      been holding out threats for some time. Every thing was made
      snug, alow and aloft; and as the wind steadily freshened, we lay
      to, at length, under spanker and foretopsail, both double-reefed.

      In this trim we rode safely enough for forty-eight hours—the ship
      proving herself an excellent sea-boat in many respects, and
      shipping no water of any consequence. At the end of this period,
      however, the gale had freshened into a hurricane, and our
      after-sail split into ribbons, bringing us so much in the trough
      of the water that we shipped several prodigious seas, one
      immediately after the other. By this accident we lost three men
      overboard with the caboose, and nearly the whole of the larboard
      bulwarks. Scarcely had we recovered our senses, before the
      foretopsail went into shreds, when we got up a storm stay-sail
      and with this did pretty well for some hours, the ship heading
      the sea much more steadily than before.

      The gale still held on, however, and we saw no signs of its
      abating. The rigging was found to be ill-fitted, and greatly
      strained; and on the third day of the blow, about five in the
      afternoon, our mizzen-mast, in a heavy lurch to windward, went by
      the board. For an hour or more, we tried in vain to get rid of
      it, on account of the prodigious rolling of the ship; and, before
      we had succeeded, the carpenter came aft and announced four feet
      of water in the hold. To add to our dilemma, we found the pumps
      choked and nearly useless.

      All was now confusion and despair—but an effort was made to
      lighten the ship by throwing overboard as much of her cargo as
      could be reached, and by cutting away the two masts that
      remained. This we at last accomplished—but we were still unable
      to do any thing at the pumps; and, in the meantime, the leak
      gained on us very fast.

      At sundown, the gale had sensibly diminished in violence, and as
      the sea went down with it, we still entertained faint hopes of
      saving ourselves in the boats. At eight P. M., the clouds broke
      away to windward, and we had the advantage of a full moon—a piece
      of good fortune which served wonderfully to cheer our drooping
      spirits.

      After incredible labor we succeeded, at length, in getting the
      longboat over the side without material accident, and into this
      we crowded the whole of the crew and most of the passengers. This
      party made off immediately, and, after undergoing much suffering,
      finally arrived, in safety, at Ocracoke Inlet, on the third day
      after the wreck.

      Fourteen passengers, with the captain, remained on board,
      resolving to trust their fortunes to the jolly-boat at the stern.
      We lowered it without difficulty, although it was only by a
      miracle that we prevented it from swamping as it touched the
      water. It contained, when afloat, the captain and his wife, Mr.
      Wyatt and party, a Mexican officer, wife, four children, and
      myself, with a negro valet.

      We had no room, of course, for any thing except a few positively
      necessary instruments, some provisions, and the clothes upon our
      backs. No one had thought of even attempting to save any thing
      more. What must have been the astonishment of all, then, when
      having proceeded a few fathoms from the ship, Mr. Wyatt stood up
      in the stern-sheets, and coolly demanded of Captain Hardy that
      the boat should be put back for the purpose of taking in his
      oblong box!

      “Sit down, Mr. Wyatt,” replied the captain, somewhat sternly,
      “you will capsize us if you do not sit quite still. Our gunwhale
      is almost in the water now.”

      “The box!” vociferated Mr. Wyatt, still standing—“the box, I say!
      Captain Hardy, you cannot, you will not refuse me. Its weight
      will be but a trifle—it is nothing—mere nothing. By the mother
      who bore you—for the love of Heaven—by your hope of salvation, I
      implore you to put back for the box!”

      The captain, for a moment, seemed touched by the earnest appeal
      of the artist, but he regained his stern composure, and merely
      said:

      “Mr. Wyatt, you are mad. I cannot listen to you. Sit down, I say,
      or you will swamp the boat. Stay—hold him—seize him!—he is about
      to spring overboard! There—I knew it—he is over!”

      As the captain said this, Mr. Wyatt, in fact, sprang from the
      boat, and, as we were yet in the lee of the wreck, succeeded, by
      almost superhuman exertion, in getting hold of a rope which hung
      from the fore-chains. In another moment he was on board, and
      rushing frantically down into the cabin.

      In the meantime, we had been swept astern of the ship, and being
      quite out of her lee, were at the mercy of the tremendous sea
      which was still running. We made a determined effort to put back,
      but our little boat was like a feather in the breath of the
      tempest. We saw at a glance that the doom of the unfortunate
      artist was sealed.

      As our distance from the wreck rapidly increased, the madman (for
      as such only could we regard him) was seen to emerge from the
      companion—way, up which by dint of strength that appeared
      gigantic, he dragged, bodily, the oblong box. While we gazed in
      the extremity of astonishment, he passed, rapidly, several turns
      of a three-inch rope, first around the box and then around his
      body. In another instant both body and box were in the
      sea—disappearing suddenly, at once and forever.

      We lingered awhile sadly upon our oars, with our eyes riveted
      upon the spot. At length we pulled away. The silence remained
      unbroken for an hour. Finally, I hazarded a remark.

      “Did you observe, captain, how suddenly they sank? Was not that
      an exceedingly singular thing? I confess that I entertained some
      feeble hope of his final deliverance, when I saw him lash himself
      to the box, and commit himself to the sea.”

      “They sank as a matter of course,” replied the captain, “and that
      like a shot. They will soon rise again, however—but not till the
      salt melts.”

      “The salt!” I ejaculated.

      “Hush!” said the captain, pointing to the wife and sisters of the
      deceased. “We must talk of these things at some more appropriate
      time.”

      We suffered much, and made a narrow escape; but fortune
      befriended us, as well as our mates in the long-boat. We landed,
      in fine, more dead than alive, after four days of intense
      distress, upon the beach opposite Roanoke Island. We remained
      here a week, were not ill-treated by the wreckers, and at length
      obtained a passage to New York.

      About a month after the loss of the “Independence,” I happened to
      meet Captain Hardy in Broadway. Our conversation turned,
      naturally, upon the disaster, and especially upon the sad fate of
      poor Wyatt. I thus learned the following particulars.

      The artist had engaged passage for himself, wife, two sisters and
      a servant. His wife was, indeed, as she had been represented, a
      most lovely, and most accomplished woman. On the morning of the
      fourteenth of June (the day in which I first visited the ship),
      the lady suddenly sickened and died. The young husband was
      frantic with grief—but circumstances imperatively forbade the
      deferring his voyage to New York. It was necessary to take to her
      mother the corpse of his adored wife, and, on the other hand, the
      universal prejudice which would prevent his doing so openly was
      well known. Nine-tenths of the passengers would have abandoned
      the ship rather than take passage with a dead body.

      In this dilemma, Captain Hardy arranged that the corpse, being
      first partially embalmed, and packed, with a large quantity of
      salt, in a box of suitable dimensions, should be conveyed on
      board as merchandise. Nothing was to be said of the lady’s
      decease; and, as it was well understood that Mr. Wyatt had
      engaged passage for his wife, it became necessary that some
      person should personate her during the voyage. This the deceased
      lady’s-maid was easily prevailed on to do. The extra state-room,
      originally engaged for this girl during her mistress’ life, was
      now merely retained. In this state-room the pseudo-wife, slept,
      of course, every night. In the daytime she performed, to the best
      of her ability, the part of her mistress—whose person, it had
      been carefully ascertained, was unknown to any of the passengers
      on board.

      My own mistake arose, naturally enough, through too careless, too
      inquisitive, and too impulsive a temperament. But of late, it is
      a rare thing that I sleep soundly at night. There is a
      countenance which haunts me, turn as I will. There is an
      hysterical laugh which will forever ring within my ears.



End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Works of Edgar Allan Poe, Volume 4, by Edgar Allan Poe

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WORKS OF EDGAR ALLAN POE, VOL. 4 ***

***** This file should be named 2150-0.txt or 2150-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/5/2150/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
