The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Works of Edgar Allan Poe, Volume 2, by Edgar Allan Poe

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Works of Edgar Allan Poe, Volume 2

Author: Edgar Allan Poe

Release Date: April, 2000  [Etext #2148]
[Most recently updated: December 10, 2020]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WORKS OF EDGAR ALLAN POE, VOL. 2 ***




THE TELL-TALE HEART.


      True!—nervous—very, very dreadfully nervous I had been and am;
      but why will you say that I am mad? The disease had sharpened my
      senses—not destroyed—not dulled them. Above all was the sense of
      hearing acute. I heard all things in the heaven and in the earth.
      I heard many things in hell. How, then, am I mad? Hearken! and
      observe how healthily—how calmly I can tell you the whole story.

      It is impossible to say how first the idea entered my brain; but
      once conceived, it haunted me day and night. Object there was
      none. Passion there was none. I loved the old man. He had never
      wronged me. He had never given me insult. For his gold I had no
      desire. I think it was his eye! yes, it was this! He had the eye
      of a vulture—a pale blue eye, with a film over it. Whenever it
      fell upon me, my blood ran cold; and so by degrees—very
      gradually—I made up my mind to take the life of the old man, and
      thus rid myself of the eye forever.

      Now this is the point. You fancy me mad. Madmen know nothing. But
      you should have seen me. You should have seen how wisely I
      proceeded—with what caution—with what foresight—with what
      dissimulation I went to work! I was never kinder to the old man
      than during the whole week before I killed him. And every night,
      about midnight, I turned the latch of his door and opened it—oh,
      so gently! And then, when I had made an opening sufficient for my
      head, I put in a dark lantern, all closed, closed, that no light
      shone out, and then I thrust in my head. Oh, you would have
      laughed to see how cunningly I thrust it in! I moved it
      slowly—very, very slowly, so that I might not disturb the old
      man’s sleep. It took me an hour to place my whole head within the
      opening so far that I could see him as he lay upon his bed.
      Ha!—would a madman have been so wise as this? And then, when my
      head was well in the room, I undid the lantern cautiously—oh, so
      cautiously—cautiously (for the hinges creaked)—I undid it just so
      much that a single thin ray fell upon the vulture eye. And this I
      did for seven long nights—every night just at midnight—but I
      found the eye always closed; and so it was impossible to do the
      work; for it was not the old man who vexed me, but his Evil Eye.
      And every morning, when the day broke, I went boldly into the
      chamber, and spoke courageously to him, calling him by name in a
      hearty tone, and inquiring how he has passed the night. So you
      see he would have been a very profound old man, indeed, to
      suspect that every night, just at twelve, I looked in upon him
      while he slept.

      Upon the eighth night I was more than usually cautious in opening
      the door. A watch’s minute hand moves more quickly than did mine.
      Never before that night had I felt the extent of my own powers—of
      my sagacity. I could scarcely contain my feelings of triumph. To
      think that there I was, opening the door, little by little, and
      he not even to dream of my secret deeds or thoughts. I fairly
      chuckled at the idea; and perhaps he heard me; for he moved on
      the bed suddenly, as if startled. Now you may think that I drew
      back—but no. His room was as black as pitch with the thick
      darkness, (for the shutters were close fastened, through fear of
      robbers,) and so I knew that he could not see the opening of the
      door, and I kept pushing it on steadily, steadily.

      I had my head in, and was about to open the lantern, when my
      thumb slipped upon the tin fastening, and the old man sprang up
      in bed, crying out—“Who’s there?”

      I kept quite still and said nothing. For a whole hour I did not
      move a muscle, and in the meantime I did not hear him lie down.
      He was still sitting up in the bed listening;—just as I have
      done, night after night, hearkening to the death watches in the
      wall.

      Presently I heard a slight groan, and I knew it was the groan of
      mortal terror. It was not a groan of pain or of grief—oh, no!—it
      was the low stifled sound that arises from the bottom of the soul
      when overcharged with awe. I knew the sound well. Many a night,
      just at midnight, when all the world slept, it has welled up from
      my own bosom, deepening, with its dreadful echo, the terrors that
      distracted me. I say I knew it well. I knew what the old man
      felt, and pitied him, although I chuckled at heart. I knew that
      he had been lying awake ever since the first slight noise, when
      he had turned in the bed. His fears had been ever since growing
      upon him. He had been trying to fancy them causeless, but could
      not. He had been saying to himself—“It is nothing but the wind in
      the chimney—it is only a mouse crossing the floor,” or “It is
      merely a cricket which has made a single chirp.” Yes, he had been
      trying to comfort himself with these suppositions: but he had
      found all in vain. All in vain; because Death, in approaching him
      had stalked with his black shadow before him, and enveloped the
      victim. And it was the mournful influence of the unperceived
      shadow that caused him to feel—although he neither saw nor
      heard—to feel the presence of my head within the room.

      When I had waited a long time, very patiently, without hearing
      him lie down, I resolved to open a little—a very, very little
      crevice in the lantern. So I opened it—you cannot imagine how
      stealthily, stealthily—until, at length a simple dim ray, like
      the thread of the spider, shot from out the crevice and fell full
      upon the vulture eye.

      It was open—wide, wide open—and I grew furious as I gazed upon
      it. I saw it with perfect distinctness—all a dull blue, with a
      hideous veil over it that chilled the very marrow in my bones;
      but I could see nothing else of the old man’s face or person: for
      I had directed the ray as if by instinct, precisely upon the
      damned spot.

      And have I not told you that what you mistake for madness is but
      over-acuteness of the sense?—now, I say, there came to my ears a
      low, dull, quick sound, such as a watch makes when enveloped in
      cotton. I knew that sound well, too. It was the beating of the
      old man’s heart. It increased my fury, as the beating of a drum
      stimulates the soldier into courage.

      But even yet I refrained and kept still. I scarcely breathed. I
      held the lantern motionless. I tried how steadily I could
      maintain the ray upon the eve. Meantime the hellish tattoo of the
      heart increased. It grew quicker and quicker, and louder and
      louder every instant. The old man’s terror must have been
      extreme! It grew louder, I say, louder every moment!—do you mark
      me well? I have told you that I am nervous: so I am. And now at
      the dead hour of the night, amid the dreadful silence of that old
      house, so strange a noise as this excited me to uncontrollable
      terror. Yet, for some minutes longer I refrained and stood still.
      But the beating grew louder, louder! I thought the heart must
      burst. And now a new anxiety seized me—the sound would be heard
      by a neighbour! The old man’s hour had come! With a loud yell, I
      threw open the lantern and leaped into the room. He shrieked
      once—once only. In an instant I dragged him to the floor, and
      pulled the heavy bed over him. I then smiled gaily, to find the
      deed so far done. But, for many minutes, the heart beat on with a
      muffled sound. This, however, did not vex me; it would not be
      heard through the wall. At length it ceased. The old man was
      dead. I removed the bed and examined the corpse. Yes, he was
      stone, stone dead. I placed my hand upon the heart and held it
      there many minutes. There was no pulsation. He was stone dead.
      His eye would trouble me no more.

      If still you think me mad, you will think so no longer when I
      describe the wise precautions I took for the concealment of the
      body. The night waned, and I worked hastily, but in silence.
      First of all I dismembered the corpse. I cut off the head and the
      arms and the legs.

      I then took up three planks from the flooring of the chamber, and
      deposited all between the scantlings. I then replaced the boards
      so cleverly, so cunningly, that no human eye—not even his—could
      have detected any thing wrong. There was nothing to wash out—no
      stain of any kind—no blood-spot whatever. I had been too wary for
      that. A tub had caught all—ha! ha!

      When I had made an end of these labors, it was four o’clock—still
      dark as midnight. As the bell sounded the hour, there came a
      knocking at the street door. I went down to open it with a light
      heart,—for what had I now to fear? There entered three men, who
      introduced themselves, with perfect suavity, as officers of the
      police. A shriek had been heard by a neighbour during the night;
      suspicion of foul play had been aroused; information had been
      lodged at the police office, and they (the officers) had been
      deputed to search the premises.

      I smiled,—for what had I to fear? I bade the gentlemen welcome.
      The shriek, I said, was my own in a dream. The old man, I
      mentioned, was absent in the country. I took my visitors all over
      the house. I bade them search—search well. I led them, at length,
      to his chamber. I showed them his treasures, secure, undisturbed.
      In the enthusiasm of my confidence, I brought chairs into the
      room, and desired them here to rest from their fatigues, while I
      myself, in the wild audacity of my perfect triumph, placed my own
      seat upon the very spot beneath which reposed the corpse of the
      victim.

      The officers were satisfied. My manner had convinced them. I was
      singularly at ease. They sat, and while I answered cheerily, they
      chatted of familiar things. But, ere long, I felt myself getting
      pale and wished them gone. My head ached, and I fancied a ringing
      in my ears: but still they sat and still chatted. The ringing
      became more distinct:—it continued and became more distinct: I
      talked more freely to get rid of the feeling: but it continued
      and gained definiteness—until, at length, I found that the noise
      was not within my ears.

      No doubt I now grew _very_ pale;—but I talked more fluently, and
      with a heightened voice. Yet the sound increased—and what could I
      do? It was a low, dull, quick sound—much such a sound as a watch
      makes when enveloped in cotton. I gasped for breath—and yet the
      officers heard it not. I talked more quickly—more vehemently; but
      the noise steadily increased. I arose and argued about trifles,
      in a high key and with violent gesticulations; but the noise
      steadily increased. Why would they not be gone? I paced the floor
      to and fro with heavy strides, as if excited to fury by the
      observations of the men—but the noise steadily increased. Oh God!
      what could I do? I foamed—I raved—I swore! I swung the chair upon
      which I had been sitting, and grated it upon the boards, but the
      noise arose over all and continually increased. It grew
      louder—louder—louder! And still the men chatted pleasantly, and
      smiled. Was it possible they heard not? Almighty God!—no, no!
      They heard!—they suspected!—they knew!—they were making a mockery
      of my horror!—this I thought, and this I think. But anything was
      better than this agony! Anything was more tolerable than this
      derision! I could bear those hypocritical smiles no longer! I
      felt that I must scream or die! and now—again!—hark! louder!
      louder! louder! _louder!_

      “Villains!” I shrieked, “dissemble no more! I admit the
      deed!—tear up the planks!—here, here!—It is the beating of his
      hideous heart!”



End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Works of Edgar Allan Poe, Volume 2, by Edgar Allan Poe

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WORKS OF EDGAR ALLAN POE, VOL. 2 ***

***** This file should be named 2148-0.txt or 2148-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/4/2148/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
